Add client user guide for smithy java (#2522)
smithy-lang/smithy: docs/source-2.0/java/client/configuration.rst

===================
Configuring Clients
===================

> Generated Smithy Java clients are composed of a number of runtime-configurable components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smithy Java clients are composed of several components which are configurable at runtime:
```

* :ref:`Protocols <java-client-protocols>` - Defines how to serialize and deserialize a client request.
* :ref:`Transports <java-client-transports>` - Manages connections and the sending of data on the wire.

> * :ref:`Auth Schemes <java-client-authSchemes>` - Add authentication/authorization information to a client request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* :ref:`Auth Schemes <java-client-authSchemes>` - Adds authentication/authorization information to a client request.
```

> * :ref:`Auth Schemes <java-client-authSchemes>` - Add authentication/authorization information to a client request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :ref:`Auth Schemes <java-client-authSchemes>` - Adds authentication/authorization information to a client request.
```

* :ref:`Endpoint Resolvers <java-client-endpoints>` - Resolves the service endpoint to call.

> * :ref:`Context Properties <java-client-context>` - Set typed properties on the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* :ref:`Context Properties <java-client-context>` - Sets typed properties on the client.
```

> * :ref:`Context Properties <java-client-context>` - Set typed properties on the client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :ref:`Context Properties <java-client-context>` - Sets typed properties on the client.
```

.. _java-client-protocols:

---------
Protocols
---------

A protocol defines how to (de)serialize and bind data into a request. For example, an HTTP+JSON protocol
would handle the serialization of data into the HTTP message body as JSON and might bind some data to the
HTTP message headers.

Configure a protocol
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Smithy IDL is protocol-agnostic and allows a service to support any number of protocols for transport and
(de)serialization of data. Like the Smithy IDL, Smithy Java clients are also protocol-agnostic and allow users
to configure a protocol at runtime.

> To set a protocol  at runtime, add the protocol to the client builder as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set a protocol at runtime, add the protocol to the client builder:
```

.. code-block:: java
    :caption: Set protocol at runtime

    var client = MyGeneratedClient.builder()
        .protocol(new MyProtocol())
        .build();

.. admonition:: Important
    :class: note

    The input/output types of the configured protocol must be compatible with the configured transport.

Set a default protocol
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> While users may want to set a different protocol at runtime, it is typically desirable for generated clients to have a default protocol that can be used without any client configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While users can set protocols at runtime, a default protocol should be set when generating the client:
```

> To configure the client code generation plugin to set a default protocol, add the protocol’s fully qualified Smithy ID to the  protocol setting in the smithy-build.json configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure the client plugin with a default protocol, add the protocol’s fully qualified Smithy ID to the protocol setting in the smithy-build.json configuration file:
```

.. code-block:: json
    :caption: smithy-build.json

    "plugins": {
        "java-client-codegen": {
          // Set the default protocol for the client.
          "protocol": "smithy.protocols#rpcv2Cbor",
          // ... additional settings
        }
    }

All protocols used for your service SHOULD use have an associated protocol trait applied to the service shape.

> For example to use the rpcv2 protocol with your service you would add the associated protocol trait to your Smithy model:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example to use the RPC v2 CBOR protocol with your service you would add the associated protocol trait to your Smithy model:
```

> For example to use the rpcv2 protocol with your service you would add the associated protocol trait to your Smithy model:

Reviewer: A service declares compatible protocols by applying the corresponding protocol trait on the service shape. For example, if a service supports the rpcV2 protocol, it must have the protocol trait applied:

> For example to use the rpcv2 protocol with your service you would add the associated protocol trait to your Smithy model:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A service declares compatible protocols by applying the corresponding protocol trait on the service shape. For example, if a service supports the rpcV2 protocol, it must have the protocol trait applied:
```

.. code-block:: smithy
    :caption: model.smithy

    @rpcV2Cbor // <- Protocol trait
    service MyService()

.. tip::

>     The built-in rpcv2-cbor protocol is a generic binary protocol provided by Smithy Java that can be a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The built-in RPC v2 CBOR protocol is a generic binary protocol provided by Smithy Java that can be a
```

>     The built-in rpcv2-cbor protocol is a generic binary protocol provided by Smithy Java that can be a
>     good choice for services that want a fast, compact data format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The rpcv2-cbor protocol is a generic binary protocol and is good choice for services that want a fast, compact data format.
```

Provided protocols
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The Smithy Java framework provides the following pre-built protocols:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smithy Java currently supports the following protocols:
```

.. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1
    :widths: 20 5 30 35 10

    * - Name
      - Type
      - Trait
      - Description
      - Package
    * - rpcv2Cbor
      - Smithy
      - ``smithy.protocols#rpcv2Cbor``
      - RPC-based protocol over HTTP that sends requests and responses with CBOR payloads.
      - ``client-rpcv2-cbor``
    * - AWS JSON 1.1
      - AWS
      - ``aws.protocols#awsJson1_1``
      - HTTP protocol that sends "POST" requests and responses with JSON documents.
      - ``aws-client-awsjson``
    * - AWS Rest JSON 1.0
      - AWS
      - ``aws.protocols#restJson1``
      - HTTP-based protocol that sends JSON requests and responses
      - ``aws-client-awsjson``
    * - AWS Rest XML
      - AWS
      - ``aws.protocols#restXml``
      - HTTP-based protocol that sends XML requests and responses

>       - ``aws-client-restxml``

Reviewer 2: Can these be made to better align on wording? The rest protocols should also call out their support for HTTP bindings.

Author: > The rest protocols should also call out their support for HTTP bindings.
That seems like too deep of a detail to me to include here. That seems more relevant to the spec than this very high level description.

> Writing  custom protocols

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Writing custom protocols
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To create a custom protocol, implement the ``ClientProtocol`` interface from the client-core package.

.. tip::

>     If you are writing a service that uses a custom HTTP protocol, you can extend the HttpClientProtocol

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If you are writing a service that uses a custom HTTP protocol, you can extend the ``HttpClientProtocol``
```

>     and use one of the codecs provided by Smithy Java to get started.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you are writing a service that uses a custom HTTP protocol, you may extend the HttpClientProtocol
    and use one of the codecs provided by Smithy Java to get started.
```

> Default protocols are discovered via Service Provider Interface (SPI).  To use a custom protocol as a default, you
> must implement a protocol factory that implements ``ClientProtocolFactory``.
> Once you have defined your factory, add it’s fully qualified name to the service provider file
> (``META-INF/services/software.amazon.smithy.java.runtime.client.core.ClientProtocolFactory``).
> A default protocol must have a corresponding protocol trait applied to the service shape being generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion 
Protocols are discovered via Service Provider Interface (SPI).  To use a custom protocol, you
must implement a protocol factory that implements ``ClientProtocolFactory``.
Once you have defined your factory, add it’s fully qualified name to the service provider file
(``META-INF/services/software.amazon.smithy.java.runtime.client.core.ClientProtocolFactory``).
As a reminder, make sure the custom protocol trait is applied to the service shape.
```

Add a link to SPI?

Reviewer: also link to the interface?

Author: I dont think we are publishing the aggregate javadocs yet.

> Smithy Java codec‘s are used by both client and server protocols for generic (de)serialization of generated types into wire data such as JSON.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Codec‘s are used by client and server protocols for generic (de)serialization of types into wire data, such as JSON.
```

> Protocols SHOULD use an appropriate codec for (de)serialization where possible. Smithy-Java provides XML, JSON, and CBOR codecs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Protocols SHOULD use an appropriate codec for (de)serialization where possible. Currently, Smithy-Java provides XML, JSON, and CBOR codecs out of the box.
```

> When writing a custom protocol, we recommend writing compliance tests that can be used to validate the protocol across

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When writing a custom protocol, we recommend writing compliance tests, which are used to validate the protocol across
```

> multiple language implementations. The ``protocol-test-harness`` package provides a JUnit5 test harness for

Reviewer 2: JUnit5 should probably be a link.

> multiple language implementations. The ``protocol-test-harness`` package provides a JUnit5 test harness for

Reviewer: Link?

running protocol compliance tests with Smithy Java.

.. _java-client-transports:

----------
Transports
----------

> Transports manages connections, and handle the sending/receiving of serialized requests/responses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transports manage connections and the sending/receiving of serialized requests/responses.
```

> ``ClientTransport``'s can also configure default functionality like adding a user-agent header for HTTP request
> by modifying the client builder using the ``configureClient`` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``ClientTransport``'s may configure default functionality, like adding a user-agent header to HTTP requests,
by modifying the client builder using the ``configureClient`` method:

.. code-block:: java
    
    <todo>
    
```

Author: I dont think we want to provide an example of this right now. It's not a common use case, just important to know it is possible.

.. admonition:: Important
    :class: note

>     When overriding the configureClient method of a ClientTransport, you need to also call the configureClient

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    When overriding the ``configureClient`` method of a ``ClientTransport``, you need to also call the ``configureClient``
```

    method of the ``MessageExchange``, if you want it to take effect. This allows for transports to override

>     or even completely remove ``MessageExchange``-wide functionality.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what this means.

Transport Discovery
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Transport implementations can be automatically discovered by client code generators and dynamic clients via SPI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transport implementations can discovered by client code generators and dynamic clients via SPI.
```

Reviewer: also 'transport implementation' vs just 'transport'?

Author: I think transport implementation is correct here given how SPI services are usually discussed.

> To make a transport implementation discoverable, implement the ``ClientTransportFactory`` service provider.

Reviewer: link

Author: No link is available yet. Ill make a pass at these once we get an aggregate javadoc publishing.

If no transport is set on a client, the client will attempt to resolve a transport compatible with the current protocol
from the discoverable transport implementations.

Setting a default transport
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To set a default, add the following to your :ref:`smithy-build.json <smithy-build>`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set a default transport, add the following to your :ref:`smithy-build.json <smithy-build>`:
```

.. code-block:: json
    :caption: smithy-build.json

    "java-client-codegen": {
        //...
        "transport": {
            "http-java": {}
        }
    }

.. admonition:: Important
    :class: note

>     Transports set as the default still need to implement the ``ClientTransportFactory`` service provider to
>     be discoverable by the code generation plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Transports MUST implement the ``ClientTransportFactory`` service provider to
    be discoverable by the code generation plugin.
```

Provided transports
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* **http-java** - Uses the ``java.net.http.HttpClient`` to send and receive HTTP messages.
                  This transport is provided by the ``client-http`` module.

.. _java-client-authSchemes:

------------
Auth Schemes
------------

> Auth schemes add authentication/authorization information to a client request. The composition of Auth schemes includes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Auth schemes add authentication/authorization information to a client request. The composition of auth schemes includes:
```

> Auth schemes add authentication/authorization information to a client request. The composition of Auth schemes includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Auth schemes add authentication and authorization information to a client request. An Auth scheme is composed of:
```

> 1. Scheme ID - A unique identifier for the authentication scheme that should correspond to the ID of a Smithy trait defining an auth scheme (see: https://smithy.io/2.0/spec/authentication-traits.html#smithy-api-authdefinition-trait)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Scheme ID - A unique identifier for the auth scheme. It should correspond to the ID of a Smithy trait defining an auth scheme (see: https://smithy.io/2.0/spec/authentication-traits.html#smithy-api-authdefinition-trait).
```

> 2. Identity resolver - An API to acquire the customer's identity

Reviewer 2: Should end with periods.

Also, integrate the `authDefinition` into the text.

> 2. Identity resolver - An API to acquire the customer's identity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Identity resolver - An API to acquire the customer's identity.
```

3. Signer - An API to sign requests using the resolved identity.

> Auth Schemes can be manually registered on a client at runtime or can be automatically registered by the client code generation plugin. To register an auth scheme at runtime:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Auth schemes can be manually registered on a client at runtime or can be automatically registered by the client code generation plugin. To register an auth scheme at runtime:
```

> Auth Schemes can be manually registered on a client at runtime or can be automatically registered by the client code generation plugin. To register an auth scheme at runtime:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Auth Schemes may be registered by the client at runtime. To register an auth scheme, use the ``putSupportedAuthSchemes`` method:
```

.. code-block:: java

    var client = MyClient.builder()
        .putSupportedAuthSchemes(new MyAuthScheme())
        .build()

Automatic registration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The Client code generation plugin can discover Auth Schemes on the classpath. If a discovered auth scheme’s ID matches

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Client code generation plugin can discover auth schemes on the classpath. If a discovered auth scheme’s ID matches
```

> an auth scheme ID in the Smithy model it will be automatically registered in the generated client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to previous configurations, auth schemes are discovered via SPI. If a discovered auth scheme’s ID matches
an auth scheme ID in the Smithy model, it will be registered in the generated client.
```

Also, 'Auth Scheme' or 'auth scheme', pick one

> To add an auth scheme automatically to a generated client based on a trait in the model, the auth scheme must provided

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To add an auth scheme automatically to a generated client based on a trait in the model, the auth scheme must provide
```

an ``AuthSchemeFactory`` implementation and register that implementation via SPI. Smithy Java client codegen will
automatically search the classpath for relevant ``AuthSchemeFactory``` implementations and attempt to match those with

> a corresponding trait in the model.

Reviewer: Can you simplify this?

> Effective Auth schemes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Effective auth schemes
```

When applied to an operation, it defines the list of all authentication schemes supported by the operation,
overriding any auth trait specified on a service.

.. code-block:: smithy
    :caption: model.smithy

    @httpBasicAuth
    @httpDigestAuth
    @httpBearerAuth
    service MyService {
        version: "2020-01-29"
        operations: [
            OperationA
            OperationB
        ]
    }

    // This operation does not have the @auth trait and is bound to a service
    // without the @auth trait. The effective set of authentication schemes it
    // supports are: httpBasicAuth, httpDigestAuth and httpBearerAuth
    operation OperationA {}

    // This operation does have the @auth trait and is bound to a service
    // without the @auth trait. The effective set of authentication schemes it
    // supports are: httpDigestAuth.
    @auth([httpDigestAuth])
    operation OperationB {}

https://smithy.io/2.0/spec/authentication-traits.html#smithy-api-auth-trait
See :ref:`Auth trait <auth-trait>` for a more thorough discussion on how auth schemes are resolved.

Identity resolution
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To use an auth-scheme in a client, the client must register a corresponding identity resolver

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use an auth scheme in a client, the client must register a corresponding identity resolver
```

that provides a compatible identity class. Auth schemes can provide a default resolver themselves
or clients can register resolvers via the client builder or via a client plugin.

.. tip::

>     Multiple Identity resolvers can be chained together using the IdentityResolver.chain method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Multiple identity resolvers can be chained together using the IdentityResolver.chain method.
```

Provided Auth Schemes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> A number of auth schemes are provided by default in the client-http package. These include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A number of auth schemes are provided by default in the ``client-http`` package. These include:
```

*  :ref:`httpBearerAuth <httpBearerAuth-trait>` - Supports HTTP Bearer Authentication as defined in RFC 6750.
*  :ref:`httpApiKeyAuth <httpApiKeyAuth-trait>` - Supports HTTP authentication using an API key sent in a header or query string parameter.

> *  :ref:`httpBasicAuth <httpBasicAuth-trait>` - Indicates that a service supports HTTP Basic Authentication as defined in RFC 2617.

Reviewer 2: Sync to "authentication"

Add the ``client-http`` package as a dependency of your project to make these auth schemes available in your service.

Worked Example: Adding HTTP API Key Authentication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Consider a Smithy modeled API for a service, ``ExampleService``. We would like to enable users of our generated SDK
to authenticate to the API using an API key sent via an ``x-api-key`` HTTP header.

> Smithy Java already provides an ``httpApiKeyAuth`` Auth Scheme that we can use to allow
> this API Key authentication.
> 
> Before we can add any Auth Scheme implementations to our generated client we must first add the associated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Smithy Java already provides an ``httpApiKeyAuth`` auth scheme that we can use to allow
this API key authentication.

Before we can add any auth scheme implementations to our generated client we must first add the associated
```
```suggestion
Smithy Java already provides an ``httpApiKeyAuth`` Auth Scheme that we can use to allow
this API Key authentication.

Before we can add any Auth Scheme implementations to our generated client we must first add the associated
```

:ref:`@httpApiKeyAuth <httpApiKeyAuth-trait>` scheme trait to our service model.

.. code-block:: smithy
    :caption: model.smithy

    namespace com.example

    @httpApiKeyAuth(name: "X-Api-Key", in: "header") // <- Add auth scheme trait
    service ExampleService {
        version: "2025-05-05"
        // ...
    }

Authentication schemes are effectively part of your services interface and so (outside of testing)

> SHOULD always be modeled in your Smithy model using a trait. See the auth definition trait for more information

Reviewer 2: Link to auth definition trait again.

on how to define a custom auth scheme in your Smithy model.

Now that we have added our auth trait to the Smithy model we need to add a corresponding AuthScheme implementation

> to our client’s dependencies. The client-http package provides an ``HttpApiKeyAuthScheme`` implementation corresponding
> to the @httpApiKeyAuth trait.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to our client’s dependencies. The ``client-http package`` provides an ``HttpApiKeyAuthScheme`` implementation corresponding
to the ``@httpApiKeyAuth`` trait.
```

.. code-block:: kotlin
    :caption: build.gradle.kts

    dependencies {
        // Add the HTTP auth scheme to the classpath
        implementation("software.amazon.smithy.java:client-http:__smithy_java_version__")
        // ...
    }

The ``HttpApiKeyAuthScheme`` class implements the ``AuthSchemeFactory`` service provider, making the auth scheme
discoverable by the client codegen plugin.

The built-in Smithy Java HTTP auth schemes all require one or more compatible ``IdentityResolver``
to be register with the client. This resolver will handle actually fetching the clients credentials.
The ``HttpApiKeyAuthScheme`` scheme needs an identity resolver that returns an ``ApiKeyIdentity``.
For testing purposes we will provide a static resolver as follows:

.. code-block:: java

    var client = ExampleService.builder()
            .addIdentityResolver(

>                 IdentityResolver.of(new ApiKeyIdentity.create("example-api-key")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                IdentityResolver.of(new ApiKeyIdentity.create("example-api-key"))
```

Reviewer 2: Something in this block sets off at least GH's syntax highlighting, maybe it's this missing paren.

        private static final String API_KEY_PROPERTY = "EXAMPLE_API_KEY"

        @Override
        public Class<ApiKeyIdentity> identityType() {
            return ApiKeyIdentity.class;
        }

        @Override
        public CompletableFuture<IdentityResult<AwsCredentialsIdentity>> resolveIdentity(AuthProperties requestProperties) {
            String apiKey = System.getenv(API_KEY_PROPERTY);

            if (apiKey == null || apiKey.isEmpty())
                return CompletableFuture.completedFuture(
                    IdentityResult.ofError(getClass(), "Could not find API KEY")
                );
            }

            return CompletableFuture.completedFuture(IdentityResult.of(ApiKeyIdentity.create(apiKey)));
        }

Smithy Java also allows identity resolvers to be chained together if we want to check multiple locations for the client.

.. code-block:: java
    :caption: Chaining identity resolvers

    IdentityResolver.chain(List.of(new FirstResolver(), new SecondResolver())

.. _java-client-endpoints:

-----------------
Endpoint Resolver
-----------------

Endpoint resolvers determine the endpoint to use for an operation. For example, an endpoint resolver could

>  determine what subdomain to use, i.e. ``us-east-2.myservice.com`` based on a region setting on the client.

Reviewer 2: Remove opening space

To set a static endpoint for a client use the following client builder setter:

.. code-block:: java

    client.builder()
        .endpointResolver(EndpointResolver.staticResolver("https://example.com"))
        .build()

.. tip::

    Create a common endpoint resolver for your organization that can be shared across clients.

.. _java-client-context:

-------------------
Context  Properties
-------------------

> Smithy Java clients allow users to add any configurations to a typed property bag, via the putConfig method.
> The properties are tied to a typed key and used by client pipeline components such as request signers.
> 
> For example, a ``REGION`` property might need to be set on the client in order for a ``Sigv4`` request signer to correctly function.
> Configuration parameters can be set on a client using a typed property key via the putConfig method:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Smithy Java clients allow users to add any configurations to a typed property bag, via the ``putConfig`` method.
The properties are tied to a typed key and used by client pipeline components such as request signers.

For example, a ``REGION`` property might need to be set on the client in order for a ``Sigv4`` request signer to correctly function.
Configuration parameters can be set on a client using a typed property key via the ``putConfig`` method:
```

.. code-block:: java
    :caption: Setting REGION context property

    static Context.Key<String> MY_PROPERTY = Context.key("a config property");

    ...

    var client = MyClient.builder()
        .putContext(MY_PROPERTY, "value")
        .build();

Custom Builder Setters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> For common settings on a client, it is often desirable to use specifically-named setter methods such as .region("us-east-1")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For common settings on a client, it is often desirable to use specifically-named setter methods such as ``.region("us-east-1")``
```

rather than requiring users to know the specific context property to use for a configuration parameter.
The ``ClientSetting`` interface can be used to create a custom setter that for client builders.

For example we would write a custom setting as:

.. code-block:: java
    :caption: custom client setting implementation

    public interface CustomSetting<B extends Client.Builder<?, B>> extends ClientSetting<B> {
        Context.Key<String> MY_PROPERTY = Context.key("A custom string configuration property");

        default B custom(String custom) {

>             // ADD ANY VALIDATION OF THE VALUE HERE

Reviewer 2: Bit of an awkward comment, at least in all caps.

Author: Will update to not yell at the reader

            return putConfig(MY_PROPERTY, custom);
        }
    }

.. tip::

    If a config property is required, make sure to validate that it exists using a default plugin (see below)

> A client setting can then be added to our generated clients using the defaultSettings setting in the smithy-build.json file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A client setting can then be added to our generated clients using the ``defaultSettings`` setting in the ``smithy-build.json`` file:
```

* :ref:`Context Properties <java-client-context>` - Sets typed properties on the client.

.. _java-client-protocols:

---------
Protocols
---------

A protocol defines how to (de)serialize and bind data into a request. For example, an HTTP+JSON protocol
would handle the serialization of data into the HTTP message body as JSON and might bind some data to the
HTTP message headers.

Configure a protocol
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Smithy IDL is protocol-agnostic and allows a service to support any number of protocols for transport and
(de)serialization of data. Like the Smithy IDL, Smithy Java clients are also protocol-agnostic and allow users
to configure a protocol at runtime.

To set a protocol at runtime, add the protocol to the client builder:

.. code-block:: java
    :caption: Set protocol at runtime

    var client = MyGeneratedClient.builder()
        .protocol(new MyProtocol())
        .build();

.. admonition:: Important
    :class: note

    The input/output types of the configured protocol must be compatible with the configured transport.

Set a default protocol
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> While users can set protocols at runtime, a default protocol should be set when generating the client:

Author: ```suggestion
While users can set protocols at runtime, a default protocol should be set when generating the client.
```

    service MyService()

.. tip::

    The rpcv2-cbor protocol is a generic binary protocol and is good choice for services that want a fast, compact data format.

Provided protocols
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Smithy Java framework provides the following protocols:

.. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1
    :widths: 20 5 30 35 10

    * - Name
      - Type
      - Trait
      - Description
      - Package
    * - rpcv2Cbor
      - Smithy
      - ``smithy.protocols#rpcv2Cbor``
      - HTTP RPC protocol that sends requests and responses with CBOR payloads.
      - ``client-rpcv2-cbor``
    * - AWS JSON 1.1
      - AWS
      - ``aws.protocols#awsJson1_1``
      - HTTP protocol that sends "POST" requests and responses with JSON payloads.
      - ``aws-client-awsjson``
    * - AWS Rest JSON 1.0
      - AWS
      - ``aws.protocols#restJson1``
      - HTTP protocol that sends requests and responses with JSON payloads
      - ``aws-client-awsjson``
    * - AWS Rest XML
      - AWS
      - ``aws.protocols#restXml``
      - HTTP protocol that sends requests and responses with XML payloads.
      - ``aws-client-restxml``

Writing custom protocols
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To create a custom protocol, implement the ``ClientProtocol`` interface from the client-core package.

Author: ```suggestion
To create a custom protocol, implement the ``ClientProtocol`` interface from the ``client-core`` package.
```

Protocols are discovered via Service Provider Interface (SPI).  To use a custom protocol, you
must implement a protocol factory that implements ``ClientProtocolFactory``.
Once you have defined your factory, add it’s fully qualified name to the service provider file
(``META-INF/services/software.amazon.smithy.java.runtime.client.core.ClientProtocolFactory``).
As a reminder, make sure the custom protocol trait is applied to the service shape.

Codec‘s are used by client and server protocols for generic (de)serialization of types into wire data, such as JSON
Protocols SHOULD use an appropriate codec for (de)serialization where possible.
Smithy Java provides XML, JSON, and CBOR codecs.

When writing a custom protocol, we recommend writing compliance tests, which are used to validate the protocol across
multiple language implementations. The ``protocol-test-harness`` package provides a `JUnit5 <https://junit.org/junit5/>`_
test harness for running protocol compliance tests with Smithy Java.

.. _java-client-transports:

----------
Transports
----------

Transports manage connections, and handle the sending/receiving of serialized requests/responses.

> ``ClientTransport``'s can also configure default functionality like adding a user-agent header for HTTP request

Author: ```suggestion
``ClientTransport``'s can also configure default functionality like adding a user-agent header for an HTTP request
```

    @httpDigestAuth
    @httpBearerAuth
    service MyService {
        version: "2020-01-29"
        operations: [
            OperationA
            OperationB
        ]
    }

    // This operation does not have the @auth trait and is bound to a service
    // without the @auth trait. The effective set of authentication schemes it
    // supports are: httpBasicAuth, httpDigestAuth and httpBearerAuth
    operation OperationA {}

    // This operation does have the @auth trait and is bound to a service
    // without the @auth trait. The effective set of authentication schemes it
    // supports are: httpDigestAuth.
    @auth([httpDigestAuth])
    operation OperationB {}

https://smithy.io/2.0/spec/authentication-traits.html#smithy-api-auth-trait
See :ref:`@auth <auth-trait>` trait for a more thorough discussion on how auth schemes are resolved.

Identity resolution
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To use an auth scheme in a client, the client must register a corresponding identity resolver
that provides a compatible identity class. Auth schemes can provide a default resolver themselves
or clients can register resolvers via the client builder or via a client plugin.

.. tip::

>     Multiple identity resolvers can be chained together using the IdentityResolver.chain method.

Author: ```suggestion
    Multiple identity resolvers can be chained together using the ``IdentityResolver.chain`` method.
```

Provided auth schemes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A number of auth schemes are provided by default in the ``client-http`` package. These include:

*  :ref:`httpBearerAuth <httpBearerAuth-trait>` - Supports HTTP Bearer authentication as defined in RFC 6750.
*  :ref:`httpApiKeyAuth <httpApiKeyAuth-trait>` - Supports HTTP authentication using an API key sent in a header or query string parameter.
*  :ref:`httpBasicAuth <httpBasicAuth-trait>` - Supports HTTP Basic authentication as defined in RFC 2617.

Add the ``client-http`` package as a dependency of your project to make these auth schemes available in your service.

Worked example: Adding HTTP API key authentication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Consider a Smithy modeled API for a service, ``ExampleService``. We would like to enable users of our generated SDK
to authenticate to the API using an API key sent via an ``x-api-key`` HTTP header.
Smithy Java already provides an ``httpApiKeyAuth`` auth scheme that we can use to allow
this API key authentication.

Before we can add any auth scheme implementations to our generated client we must first add the associated

> :ref:`@httpApiKeyAuth <httpApiKeyAuth-trait>` scheme trait to our service model.

Author: ```suggestion
:ref:`@httpApiKeyAuth <httpApiKeyAuth-trait>` scheme trait to our service model:
```

.. code-block:: smithy
    :caption: model.smithy

    namespace com.example

    @httpApiKeyAuth(name: "X-Api-Key", in: "header") // <- Add auth scheme trait
    service ExampleService {
        version: "2025-05-05"
        // ...
    }

Authentication schemes are effectively part of your services interface and so (outside of testing)
SHOULD always be modeled in your Smithy model using a trait. See the :ref:`@authDefinition <authDefinition-trait>`
trait for more information on how to define a custom auth scheme in your Smithy model.

Now that we have added our auth trait to the Smithy model we need to add a corresponding auth scheme implementation
to our client’s dependencies. The ``client-http package`` provides an ``HttpApiKeyAuthScheme`` implementation corresponding

> to the ``@httpApiKeyAuth`` trait.

Author: ```suggestion
to the ``@httpApiKeyAuth`` trait:
```

                IdentityResolver.of(new ApiKeyIdentity.create("example-api-key"))
            )
            .build()

Or, we could create a custom resolver that resolves the ``ApiKeyIdentity`` from an environment variable, ``EXAMPLE_API_KEY``:

.. code-block:: java
    :caption: Environment variable identity resolver implementation

    public final class EnvironmentVariableIdentityResolver implements IdentityResolver<ApiKeyIdentity> {
        private static final String API_KEY_PROPERTY = "EXAMPLE_API_KEY"

        @Override
        public Class<ApiKeyIdentity> identityType() {
            return ApiKeyIdentity.class;
        }

        @Override
        public CompletableFuture<IdentityResult<AwsCredentialsIdentity>> resolveIdentity(AuthProperties requestProperties) {
            String apiKey = System.getenv(API_KEY_PROPERTY);

            if (apiKey == null || apiKey.isEmpty())
                return CompletableFuture.completedFuture(
                    IdentityResult.ofError(getClass(), "Could not find API KEY")
                );
            }

            return CompletableFuture.completedFuture(IdentityResult.of(ApiKeyIdentity.create(apiKey)));
        }

> Smithy Java also allows identity resolvers to be chained together if we want to check multiple locations for the client.

Author: ```suggestion
Smithy Java also allows identity resolvers to be chained together if we want to check multiple locations for the client:
```

To set a static endpoint for a client use the following client builder setter:

.. code-block:: java

    client.builder()
        .endpointResolver(EndpointResolver.staticResolver("https://example.com"))
        .build()

.. tip::

    Create a common endpoint resolver for your organization that can be shared across clients.

.. _java-client-context:

-------------------
Context properties
-------------------

Smithy Java clients allow users to add any configurations to a typed property bag, via the putConfig method.
The properties are tied to a typed key and used by client pipeline components such as request signers.

For example, a ``REGION`` property might need to be set on the client in order for a ``Sigv4`` request signer to correctly function.
Configuration parameters can be set on a client using a typed property key via the putConfig method:

.. code-block:: java
    :caption: Setting REGION context property

    static Context.Key<String> MY_PROPERTY = Context.key("a config property");

    ...

    var client = MyClient.builder()
        .putContext(MY_PROPERTY, "value")
        .build();

Custom builder setters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> For common settings on a client, it is often desirable to use specifically-named setter methods such as .region("us-east-1")

Author: ```suggestion
For common settings on a client, it is often desirable to use specifically-named setter methods such as ``.region("us-east-1")``
```

        Context.Key<String> MY_PROPERTY = Context.key("A custom string configuration property");

        default B custom(String custom) {
            return putConfig(MY_PROPERTY, custom);
        }
    }

.. tip::

    If a config property is required, make sure to validate that it exists using a default plugin (see below)

A client setting can then be added to our generated clients using the defaultSettings setting in the smithy-build.json file:

.. code-block:: json
    :caption: smithy-build.json

    "java-client-codegen": {
        //...
        "defaultSettings": [
            "com.example.settings.CustomSetting"
        ],
        //...
    }

Now we can use our new setting as follows:

.. code-block:: java

    var client = MyClient.builder()
        .custom("that was easy!")
        .build();

.. tip::

    Default settings are typically paired with a default plugin to add the configuration and behavior of a feature
    (respectively) to a client by default.

Composing settings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Some features require multiple custom settings. Because custom settings are simply Java interfaces, we can compose them.

> For example, the SigV4 auth scheme requires that a region setting and clock setting be set on a client as well
> as an additional settings, the signing name of the service. We can define the ``SigV4Settings`` interface as follows:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the SigV4 auth scheme requires that region, clock, and signing name settings be configured on a client. We can define the ``SigV4Settings`` interface as follows:

```

.. code-block:: java
    :caption: composed setting

    public interface SigV4Settings<B extends ClientSetting<B>>
        extends ClockSetting<B>, RegionSetting<B> {

        /**
         * Service name to use for signing. For example {@code lambda}.
         */
        Context.Key<String> SIGNING_NAME = Context.key("Signing name to use for computing SigV4 signatures.");

        /**
         * Signing name to use for the SigV4 signing process.
         *
         * <p>The signing name is typically the name of the service. For example {@code "lambda"}.
         *
         * @param signingName signing name.
         */
        default B signingName(String signingName) {
            // Validation of the signing name
            if (signingName == null || signingName.isEmpty()) {
                throw new IllegalArgumentException("signingName cannot be null or empty");
            }
            return putConfig(SIGNING_NAME, signingName);
        }
    }

> When the ``SigV4Settings`` interface is added to the codegen configuration as a default setting it will also add the
> ``ClockSetting`` and ``RegionSetting`` setters to the generated client’s builder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the ``SigV4Settings`` interface is added to the codegen configuration as a default setting, the
``ClockSetting`` and ``RegionSetting`` setters will be included in the generated client’s builder.
```
